+++
date = '2025-07-10'
tags = ['personal', 'music']
title = 'Everything in Its Right Place'
+++

Two years ago, I travelled to Japan for the first time. Japan is a trend right now; it is not a surprise to anyone. It is an amazing country for a lot of reasons: its gastronomy, beautiful landscapes and nature, and last but not least, its pop culture that has spread worldwide. Anyway, today I am not here to talk about my trip to Japan or its culture—I don't know anything about it—today, I would like to talk about how I rekindled my passion for music because it has a lot to do with this trip.

Before I start explaining to you how my trip to Japan helped me to enjoy listening to music again, it is important to have a bit of context on how I was consuming music until a few months ago. Mainly, I listened to music at my PC while working; that's why I didn't attend to what I was listening to—music was like white noise to me. **I just went from listening to music to hearing music**. Moreover, for a long time, I have been using Spotify as my daily driver to listen to music on all of my devices. These platforms, by default, make the playback not stop; an algorithm chooses similar songs after what you have selected ends. At the end, I end up listening to a lot of music and just forgetting it in no time. If this is not enough, loss of attention has increased more these last years due to new formats. The music industry is launching more singles instead of records, making it harder to listen to albums when they are released. I struggled a lot to be able to listen a CD from start to end. Consuming music has been converted to fast food, and I didn't manage to escape from it.

Enough context for now; just get back to my trip to Japan. I don't know if it was just my wife and me, but both of us went into a consumerism loop. Into this spiral, I decided to buy a DAP (digital audio player), specifically the *Sony NW-A306*. From the first moment, I knew it was a bad buy, and I was moved by consumerism and nostalgia about using this kind of device when I was a kid. One year after the buy, it was clear it was a bad one; **I had used the device three or four times at most**.

The device was not working as the way I was used to listening to music, mainly due to two reasons. Firstly, as I said before, I used to listen to music on my PC; it was nonsense to power up the DAP when I could use the PC directly. Common sense dictated to use it outside my home. Here comes the second issue, using online platforms means that you need an internet connection or to download what you want to listen to previously to use it offline. The DAP is not a fast device; moreover, battery life is not amazing when used connected to a network or using Bluetooth devices. That's why, at the end, I ended up using my smartphone for this use case too, raising the same issue again, missing the focus. Anyway, it can sound weird, but **it was the device on which I was enjoying listening to music the most**. I don't know if it was due to the quality of the headphones—I don't use the same headphones on DAP and PC—or just a way to convince me I didn't waste my money. In any case, I decided to give it a second chance but, this time, change my listening habits and the way I used it.

First, I fixed the easiest ones: battery life and smoothness of the device. To be able to achieve it, I just decluttered the device and configured it properly—I followed [this guide](https://www.head-fi.org/threads/sony-wm1am2-and-wm1zm2-android-walkman-optimization-guide.962975/). Secondly, the most important one, I stopped using Spotify on the DAP and just listened to music I had on the device memory. I bought a microSD and saved all the music I had at home.

With these changes, I started to use the DAP more, at home and outside. I am thankful for giving a second chance to the DAP because I rediscovered a lot of bands like Radiohead. But not only that, listening with the DAP and having a limited collection forced me to listen to records I didn't listen to a lot when they were released. *Frances the Mute* from The Mars Volta—it has become my favourite album of the band— *Ghost Reveries* and *Watershed* from Opeth, *Dhraa* from Roig!—the best band from Mallorca—and many more records and bands. Moreover, I wanted to grow my music library, and I started again buying CDs, both physical and digital, using platforms like Bandcamp or Qobuz. In that way, I give better support to my favourite bands because right now, online platforms, like Spotify, are not paying a lot to the artists.

I know that some of the issues I have listed can be solved without buying any device; for example, the autoplay feature can be disabled to prevent playing similar songs after reaching the end of an album. Anyway, if the objective of this post was to convince you to buy a DAP, I could just finish right now, saying something like the DAP has changed my relationship with music. However, **I am not here to sell to you anything**. I think the DAP has triggered changes on my habits listening to music, that changes are what made me to enjoy listening to music again.

The most important one is I have started to use it when I am going out to take a walk or doing some errand, while I am walking, **all of my attention is centred on the music**. Doing that, I just started to enjoy more the device and craving for it at home when I am doing something not really demanding where I can maintain the focus on music. Or just to listen to a record because I am enjoying it—yes, it can sound strange nowadays, but sometimes I just listen to music without doing nothing more. Some paragraphs before, I said I don't know why I was enjoying more to listen to music on the DAP instead of the PC. It's true, both devices sound different, but the reality is that I am enjoying more the DAP because I am focused on the music instead of other tasks. Another important reason is the curation of my collection and active selection of what I want to listen at the moment. Firstly, I need to choose what to store on the microSD, it has no infinite space, or just buy some album. Furthermore, when I reach the end of a record, I must pick what to listen next consciously instead of delegating it to an algorithm. Last but not least, having a limited collection helped me to listen more times the same albums, finding details I didn't notice before or just discovering songs that sneaked out on my previous listening. The same happened with records, as I said before, I have discovered some albums of bands I love.

That is the story of how a bad buy from my trip to Japan have become the trigger of my habit changes regarding listening to music. In any case, I will be honest with you: I am still listening to music while working, although I know it is useless. But what it matters the most is that I have found a way to stop to be tired and break the monotony with the music, as Thom Yorke said at the beginning of Kid A —*Everything in Its Right Place*.
